In this section,
we will look at many tools that are used in communication that you may use as a
project manager to help you maximize your communications.
Also, we want to keep in mind the five Cs we learned before.
Okay, let's get started.
Here is an overview of the communication tools that I'll be speaking about.
On the left, they'll be more physical, that is I see you.
You're going to be in the presence of the people
themselves that you're communicating with.
And on the right will be what I call my 1s and 0s communication tools.
On the left then are presentations where you're going to
be physically in the room presenting, meetings where you're physically there,
of course, web conferencing, not physically there per say,
but you still see people, talk to people,
stand ups, and walk-arounds.
On the right, status reports, email, telephone,
somewhat physical, instant messaging, texting,
and social media.
Okay, let's get started.
Presentations.
This is on the physical side, of course,
and maybe even one of the most physical because you're front and center.
Okay,
I'd like you to have the outcome in mind before you
start writing your presentation.
Know exactly what you want to accomplish by giving the presentation.
Open with something surprising or intriguing,
something that will get your audience to sit up and take notice.
Very important.
You want their attention.
Ensure they understand why they are there and what outcome is expected of them.
Remember, you are presenting for a reason.
Keep that in mind and focus the slide's content and
your delivery on the outcome.
Maintain good eye contact.
This creates a connection with your audience.
And do not hand out the presentation in the beginning,
you will lose your audience.
They'll start flipping through it and maybe even go to the
last slide to see what the budget will be.
So you'll have a stack of it on the side and say,
hey, I'll be handing this out when my presentation is over.
Also, engage with your audience.
You know, encourage questions.
This ensures better understanding.
And maybe pause throughout the presentation to say,
hey, are there any questions?
And lastly of course, follow the five Cs.
Meetings.
I know we all love them, but no agenda?
No meeting.
No exception.
Otherwise you are wasting everyone's time, including your own.
So create an agenda.
And remember,
an agenda is a very powerful tool in guiding the meeting and its outcome.
So, know your expected outcome.
What do you want out of the meeting?
Make sure your agenda reflects exactly what you want.
So,
list items to discuss and ensure in that list of items
that your outcome could be realized.
Determine who needs to be there, how you would like them to contribute,
and don't leave out any key subject matter,
experts, or stakeholders because you'll need their inputs.
Send out the agenda prior to the meeting,
make sure everyone knows what the meeting will cover,
and they'll all see who will be attending,
as well.
You are also the focus of the meeting or even the center of
attention when you're leading the meeting.
No matter how interesting you think your agenda is,
they will be watching you,
so maintain good eye contact and this creates a
connection again with your attendees.
Document actions and outcomes.
So while the meeting is being conducted,
capture the meeting notes and maybe afterwards you want to
clean up those notes before you send them out.
If you need to,
bring a person with you to capture the notes in case
you are very busy in the meeting.
Stay on track, that is stay on the agenda, and manage any wasted chitchat.
I call it chitchat, just idle talk that can be very distractive in the meeting.
Okay, the meeting notes.
You want to know who attended and who did not since this will
also be part of your email of the notes,
whatever agreements were made you capture those.
You capture all the actions that were agreed to in terms of who will do the
action and when the expected action will be complete.
And lastly, hey, when's the next meeting date and time.
Also, don't forget the five Cs.
Web conferencing.
We've all done it and it's great, but it's still a meeting,
so follow the meeting guidelines that I set forth on the previous slide.
Saves travel cost and time.
Certainly,
web conferencing saves businesses time and money and within a few minutes,
meeting attendees can log in to a meeting without wasting time
at the airport or spending money on a ticket.
I save lots of time myself by not having to sit in traffic,
even for a local client.
Increases work efficiency.
Scheduling meetings typically takes more time than
simply inviting or mandating attendees.
If you're the host, which you'll likely be as a project manager,
you'll have to book a conference room.
It seems like now days, there are fewer and fewer conference rooms,
so maybe a web conference is perfect and it's a little easier to do.
Flexible.
Sometimes it can be difficult to hold impromptu meetings
when people you need to meet are not local.
Web conferencing provides, of course, that flexibility.
Reduces, but doesn't eliminate geographic barriers,
since anyone with an internet connection and a computer can attend,
it's perfect.
Web conferencing opens up possibilities for communication
with employees and customers worldwide.
We've all used it and we all know that.
Increases engagement.
With the audio and visual components,
it's very much like a regular meeting and I'm sure most
of you use this format all the time.
Now, every company might be different.
Some companies have an approved web conferencing tool, others don't.
Many are out there that are free you can use.
But remember it's a meeting,
so have an agenda and run it like a meeting and always follow the five Cs check.
Now, I think sometimes web conferencing can have a downside.
You don't have real eye contact, you can't observe the body language,
and maybe those other sidebar talks and other little
face-to-faces you have won't be there.
So what I'd like to suggest to you is what kind of meeting is this?
If you need a customer buy-in, if this is a critical,
critical meeting, try as hard as you can to have it as a face-to-face.
If it's kind of a more of a status meeting or let's go
over some requirements real quick, web conferencing can probably work just fine,
but don't overuse web conferencing when you need that eye-to-eye
contact or real critical decision to be made.
Even if you don't use an agile methodology or scrum,
stand ups is a great tool and easy to learn and apply for your team.
What is it?
It's just a quick discussion with your small team or group.
Okay, quick means 5 to 10 minutes.
It shouldn't be any longer, otherwise, it's a real meeting,
and they want you to have an agenda, etc.
And stand up means just that.
No sitting, unless you have some sort of handicap,
certainly, and they can be planned or spontaneous.
I do both based on the nature of the issue.
Stand ups have a lot of benefits.
You can get real time feedback on project activities,
and again, you can see the eye contact and body language,
and you're close, you're just standing next to each other.
I like that.
We want to do early avoidance of issues or problems.
Remember, early detection of issues is one of your methods for success.
And you get a really good pulse and feel for the team in a very
somewhat informal atmosphere and I like that as well,
and I think your team would appreciate that too.
So here's how it works.
So basically go quickly around the room or around the area you're standing in.
You might ask, what have you done yesterday?
Oh, I've worked on this or that.
What are you planning to do today?
Oh, I'm planning on working on this or that.
Do you have any problems preventing you from
accomplishing your goal or goals for the day?
Okay, this sedative communication dialogue truly creates synergy,
teamwork, and what I call, magic.
In that, you can determine issues early,
avoid bugs, create better teamwork, and show that you care.
Remember, that is a trait of leadership.
Frequency.
You know as needed, but maybe once or twice a week.
It depends.
If you think things are drifting or are critical,
then daily, maybe even twice a day in certain cases.
Don't be shy.
Don't overdo it.
Find the right balance for yourself.
And also, the five Cs.
They may not all apply here because this is a little
more of an informal arrangement, but many of them might.
But think about it and consider it.
Now that we've been standing, let's start walking around.
Walk-arounds create opportunities for impromptu communication.
You and a team will benefit from literally walking around.
These are casual drop-in visits,
maybe just three minutes on the way to lunch or break.
Basically, you want to see if you can catch someone in their office.
And if you can, you want to visit or talk to them,
possibly each team member every day.
I try to hit each of my team members every day for just a minute or two.
Possibly, my customers maybe once a week I like to do a casual drop-in.
Stakeholders, maybe twice a month.
You come up with your own timeframe.
And with your own personal manager, I would say certainly, each day.
Now if you're not in the same geographic area,
of course, you might want to use the phone and just hey,
how's it going?
What's up?
Don't use the phone necessarily for a meeting or a conference,
you're just going to use it as a casual drop-in.
Now in this form of communication, the five Cs may not completely apply,
but of course, you always need to be courteous.
Now the walk-around is spontaneous ad hoc and flexible to
create a new communication platform, but be careful to not be disruptive.
The higher you are though up in the org chart,
if you will, the more flat they will feel when you poke your head in.
But again, be careful, you can be disruptive.
If they're busy and their head's down, cranking,
pass that, maybe in the next hour or two you can drop in and say hello.
Your project team,
people you work with will greatly appreciate the casual drop-in,
how are you doing, what's going on, what are you working on.
People appreciate that interaction.
It shows that you care. It shows that you are a leader.